mummuleno. 12⁰0. 21

[Robert de Valoignes] was never eeised thereof as of fee and
right; and hs produces a chirograph made between Robert,
Abbot of S. Alban's, and Peter de Valoignss, junior, which γ
testifica that ths Abbot hae granted to Peter the said wood,
for the life only of the said Peter, paying therefor yearly
twenty-five shillings and two goshawks ; so that if [Peter]
shall end his life or shall change it, that wood shall not
romain to any ons of tho heire or friends of Peter, but 't
shall return to the Abbeyof S.A1ban’s; so that Peter ought
to take nothing thorein‚ except necessarios for his house,
and [hc ought* not] to sell [anything]. And [the Abbot]
also produces a charter of Lanfranc, Archbishop of (lanter-
bury, then chief Justiciar, attesting this agreement. He
produces also a charter of King Henry the father witnessing
that Peter the grandfather of the aforesaid Peter did not
hold that wood except ior tha term of his life only, and [he
produces] a confirmation of King Richard and a confir-
mation of King John witnessing the same thing; and hs .
prays that these testimonies may be allowed in his favour.
Robert, son of Walter, and Gunnora, say that they demand
that wood and¹ the seisin which Robert [de Valoignes],
father of Gunnora, had after Peter died, who was eeised
thereos ae of inheritance; and [they say that] if they ought
to answer to the chartsrs which [the Abbot] produced, they
will show that [the charters] ought not to injure them,
because Robert [de Valoignes] had seisin of that wood after
the death of the said Peter, and after the charter of Abbot
Robert was made; and similarly aa to the testimony of
Archbishop Lanfranc; [neverthelees] if it behoves them to
answer to the charters, they will anewer. The Abbot says
that if what is said above and the chartcrs cannot suffice,
he puts himself on the great assiae of the King, and prays
that there may be a recognition whether Robert son of
Walter and Gunnora have more right to hold that wood of
the Abbey, or the Abbot in demesne3 and [the demandante]
similarly grant the assiae. A day is given them on the
Octava cf S. Martin to hear their judgment.

 

